All good? Yep. Thank you, Minister, for your time.
We have you here for 45 minutes, and if you would like to start by
some opening remarks, if you could keep them brief. Thank you.
Oh, thank you very much,
Dr Palmer, and thank you to all the members and the committee for the work
it's done, particularly around the economic development space, the commerce
space, small business manufacturing space, and all the reviews,
reports, and select committee work you've done.
It has been well noted.
It's great to be here
two months into my appointment as small business and
manufacturing minister.
The votes for these
categories, small business and manufacturing, are
relatively small in the scheme of our
budget 2026. But nonetheless, the work that we
are doing
is ongoing and important.
One of the things that
I've been keen to focus on the first couple of months
is that level of engagement with small business and manufacturing.
And I want to acknowledge the difficult times
that small business and manufacturers have
endured in the last few months in particular,
and are enduring. It's not an easy time
to be in small business
and manufacturing in this country.
But
as we saw with the Befu
on the 28th of May by the Minister of Finance,
once we look through this Iranian conflict,
there certainly are some good forecasts there by
Treasury.
When you look at
growth averaging out at 2.7%,
when you look at the 220,000 jobs that will be created,
when you look at the containment of inflation and
interest rates, when you look at public debt,
the curve of public debt coming down,
you will see that the medium to long-term forecasts
remain pretty positive for this country.
And
we are looking forward to working through the current
issues globally and
getting back
on track, if you like.
So it's been great to be out there engaging with small businesses and
manufacturers, and I've done a lot of it all around the South Island and parts of
the North Island, and I will continue to do that.
One of the things, members, that's really impressed me and actually opened
my eye was the Regional Business Partner network that
we actually have a relationship with, a close relationship, a
monetary relationship, with 15 of our chambers
of commerce and economic development agencies inside
councils across regional New Zealand.
And I encourage you all to
connect with these regional business partners.
That gives us all an in as to how they are getting with their
members. And the business advisory services that we fund in partnership
with them, and the mentoring that they offer, are
going to continue to go to thousands of small businesses and manufacturers
up and down the country. And so that is something that has
been quite an awakening to me, that Regional Business Partner network.
Also, the work that's been done by
my predecessors in this role around the
Manufacturing
Productivity Advisory Group, MPAG,
and the Small Business Advisory Group.
We meet regularly with these members, and they are
senior members of the
small business community and some really key manufacturers that
come together, volunteer their time,
and give us free and frank advice and feedback
as to
how we're going as a government, how we're going as a country, how we're going in
policy development and delivery.
An offshoot of that has been the Advancing Manufacturing
Aotearoa group that's CE'd
by Catherine Lai. Again, they are rolling out through
that vehicle, AMA, they are rolling out a lot of support
for our manufacturers. There's a number of
things that I can point to, but perhaps they will come up, specifics,
in the line of questioning. Again, I just want to take the opportunity to
thank you for giving me this opportunity,
and we will do our best to answer your questions
as efficiently and as effectively as we can.
Thank you. So we have first question from Dan Goswell.
Yeah, thank you, Chair, and thank you, Minister.
It's first scrutiny week as a minister.
It's my first scrutiny week-
... as the spokesperson as well, so it's a first time for both of us.
I just want to pick up on some of your answers to my questions in
the supplementary
estimates questionnaire, questions 16 Of 13,
16, and 22 in particular.
You outlined a system where services supporting small businesses are
largely limited to advisory services,
digital tools, and programs delivered through the regional
business partner network that you've highlighted before, and there's also
business.gov and then Business Connect.
Mm.
At the same time within those answers, you confirm that the government does
not track core outcomes like small business
survival, productivity, or revenue growth, instead
focusing on the process measures like usage
and
usage of the services rather than measuring the actual outcomes.
So I feel that is a little bit of a missed opportunity there.
But given that the budget does not introduce significant
new funding for small business support, and your own
framework does not measure whether businesses are
surviving or growing, what is your plan to
materially improve outcomes for small businesses over the next
12 months?
Yep. Oh, very good, and thank you,
Mr Rosewan, for those questions. I'll
defer to Mr Blakely
or Mr
Vanderschiff here as far as specifics around business
measurements. But one fact that we do
know is that business starts, as they call
them,
have risen in the last couple of years, new businesses,
to 70,000 per year. Now that is actually up from
60,000 per year pre-COVID. And so
as wellington.nz,
that economic agency told me the other day,
there are more restaurants that have opened in the past year in
Wellington than have closed. And so there
continue to be
a lot of people still going into business.
There continue to be a lot of restaurants that are still opening.
There continue to be 250,000 people employed in
manufacturing. And so there are some good broader
numbers there, and as I pointed to, the medium to
long-term forecasts are looking strong, as we saw in
Befu. But I'll
put it over to my officials as to some of those points that you raised around
the measuring of the success of some of our programs and what it means on the
ground.
Yeah, when you're measuring our programs, there's a trade-off
between what's more directly influenceable by
MB and then what are sort of outcome measures for what you would hope to
see. And so those sort of measures are the ones that are more directly measurable
and can be more directly attributable to MB's efforts.
But obviously those broader outcomes are exactly
what
you're hoping for, and those measures are available, and they are part of a
broader suite of thinking about success in the economy.
As the minister said,
particularly through times of economic
change, you do see while you might see business closures, you also see
business openings, and actually that can be a source of dynamism in the economy as
well.
Thank you. And I just want to drill into the regional business best
partner network funding. So there's what, $2.4
million,
and it's expected that that will support a projected amount of
5,000 businesses.
Can you help me understand that? Because, I mean, to me that seems like
$480 per business, and that's not even including like the
admin FTE costs, and it could be a lot less.
So I mean, is that enough?
Well, and I'll again defer to my officials,
but the regional business partner
network has been well-supported and is
incredibly popular
amongst those business economic agencies and chambers.
But more importantly, their members and those small businesses who
access those services. We've put
in extra resource on the AI pilot. You might have seen
more places there. We've put in extra resource on a
resilience package for businesses to
access. We've put in more resource around
better AI integration and discovery and use for
small businesses to access via Business South, Mike
Collins based in Dunedin, and via Business Mentors New Zealand,
that I announced last week with
their CE, Sarah Trotman in Auckland.
And so,
the response we get on the ground is really encouraging and arguably,
when it comes to small businesses wanting to know how they can better integrate
AI
to lift their productivity and ultimately their profitability,
those services are,
we would struggle to meet demand in the longer term.
Thanks for touching on the AI. Oh, sorry. Did you want to say something?
If I can just clarify a few things.
The operational costs of MB for next year will be
in the region of 1.5 million. That's more resource internally
that we have. But for the regional business partner network that funds
the grant advisors or the contracts that the minister has pointed
to, and then the capability vouchers is
13.9 odd billion. So
that's what the regional business partner gets of the total appropriation.
Yeah. So it's not like direct funding to businesses, it's funding to those partners
who will then have different-
Yeah
... ways of supporting businesses. There might be one to many.
So there's a whole range of things they need to make the most of that money.
Well, thank you, and thank you for touching on the AI piece because I had a few
questions around that as well.
Yeah, please.
So why is the regional business partner network being asked to
deliver additional work in the AI space at
the same time as operational support for that network has
been reduced?
Well, I don't know if that's a fair characterization of
what's actually happening there.
Well, there was additional funding added for the AI pilot.
Okay. All right.
Yeah.
No, thanks for clearing that. And so what criteria are used
to prioritize which businesses receive support through the
regional business partner network?
Well, again, we don't want to be
paternalistic on this and demand it from Wellington.
There are certain criteria that are uniformed across the program
that at the end of the day, those business mentors and
contractors and experts that are engaged with
their local chamber as
an employee or a supplier or their local
economic development unit,
are ultimately tasked with
who meets that criteria. But I think you'll see that it's
anyone that
qualifies as a small business
as far as FTEs go, and also under
the AI pilot, it's a co-funding arrangement
of up to $15,000. And so some small businesses
can't afford that at the moment, but they can afford the two and
a half thousand initial assessment, and then they
wait, and then they go again for the next stage.
And so they are getting a very specific
business specific advice,
one-to-one as to how they can better integrate
their business with AI. And so it might be a consultancy
business or it might be a panel beating business.
Those programs and those mentors that
we are co-funding are delivering that support as
specifically as is required.
Okay. So just I want to say to members that before you move on to the
next topic, you need to let me know.
I'm happy with supplementaries like four or five supplementaries after a
primary. That's totally fine. But if you move on to the new topic, because there
might be other members who have a supplementary.
I'm ready for a new topic.
You're looking for a new topic. Yep. Supplementary.
Thank you, Minister. And these questions have probably been
focused around the regional partners.
But can you actually just give us a summary of what the government is doing
to support small businesses to adopt AI?
You've given a lot of kind of bits and pieces through it, but can you just give us
a direct answer what-
Yes
... what it entails?
Well, one thing that spun out, and I might be putting a minister of commerce
hat on here, but cabinet has asked, and it was reported
on
One News for a, particularly pertaining to copyright, and
we've seen examples of
an apparel retailer that has been called into question
on copyright stuff and that. And
cabinet has asked the Minister of Commerce to look at an
AI framework as to what we can do in a
regulatory sense because the Prime
Minister made a commitment that they would, I think a Trans-Tasman
commitment with Mr. Albanese last month, that they would
collectively work on how do we deal with AI in a regulatory sense.
So there's that, and I'll defer to my,
as far as the specifics of our AI program, but you're right,
we have funded those specific initiatives.
Again, they are business advisory services
that are being co-funded by the users and that are being
supplied and provided by the likes of Chambers of Commerce and
economic development agencies.
There's a few approaches into the AI
world that we have done, albeit we can always do more.
In the starting lineup, we have business.gov.
So business.gov is designed specifically to be that
mass distribution in terms of how do you support capability in this
space.
We have an entire playbook of videos on the
biz.gov YouTube channel, which is designed to support businesses
to get their head around AI and to encourage them to think about how they might
explore it. And the purpose of the videos is to use real businesses
to talk to other businesses as to how they've used it and then hopefully
encourage that adoption.
The AI pilot
actually came off the back of discussions with that small business
advisory group that the minister mentioned.
So that's a group of
business advisory as well as small businesses that
spoke about two challenges in particular, and the first was being
right now, the original business partner network is aimed at a capability
build, management training, and the likes.
But actually, in today's world right now, some small businesses just need
advice and advisory type services.
And so how might we go about doing that?
And then the second item that came up is this adoption of AI.
So we've pretty much built the pilot around how do we
test leading into some advisory type support and business on the one hand,
and use this opportunity to use AI because it's such an important
piece for the economy and for businesses.
Okay.
Supplementary, Dr. Lewis.
Yeah. Thank you, Hamish, for that question.
And
my question is really around if we're providing advice, and it's co-funded, which
is great.
The question is around the quality of the advice that we're providing and the
mentors that we're using.
Having some experience in this space before we were hiring mentors, not
always the best.
So some of the outcome measures around that would be really interesting if you
have some of that, like are we using net promoter score or anything like that
to sort of assess the quality of the advice that's being provided?
Yeah.
Ross, do you have an answer to the question?
We do
use the likes of net promoter score and all the rest of it.
So for example, in the regional business partner network, I don't have the exact
number right in front of me, but its net promoter score is
significant.
It's good.
It's really good. It's like 70% or something to that effect.
So I can come back and give you the specifics.
Yeah, we can come back next week.
Yeah, no, I just want to know that they're there. There's no issue.
Because it's so vital for them when they're-
It is
... ready.
Ross is right as far as their AI pilot came directly out of the
small business advisory group, and like our manufacturing advisory group,
they a year or two ago were promoting an
accelerated depreciation policy from the government, and so we
are working so closely, and then you saw Investment Boost announce, and they take
credit for that.
Yeah.
And interestingly,
because that was one of their suggestions that we worked on, but when you go around
manufacturing
plants and the likes, often
those people that are taking me and others on tours will say, "That
piece of plant there we bought through after the Investment
Boost policy came in. We accelerated our investment.
We got 20% off our taxable income. We are grateful for that
policy at this time of the cycle."
It's good they advise you then, isn't it?
Yeah. So the advisors are getting some wins as well.
All right. A new primary from Dan.
Thanks, Chair. Thanks, Minister.
So you mentioned in your opening remarks that it is a tough time
for business. No one in this room would disagree with that.
Turning back to your answer to my question in the House, 19th of
May, it was your first and it was my first as well.
Mm.
You said that you'd received no advice on rising liquidation.
What specific steps have you taken since then to understand or
respond to the increase in small business failures?
Oh, well, I think it's a whole of government
approach as to how we can get back on our foils.
You can see from
my colleagues and I,
that we are driving pretty hard a growth
agenda, a doubling of the export agenda,
growing jobs. You can see off the BeefE that
the treasury is now expecting in the medium term
for wages to be exceeding inflation.
And so we are starting, once we get through this difficult
period, where a lot of decisions have been delayed
with the Middle East conflict. I think you're seeing some really
positive green shoots out there. We just need to get there.
You would've seen with the HeiFu December last year that
'26 was looking great. And then, of course, we
had late February,
the conflict begun and a lot of decisions by business and by
consumers
have been deferred. But our medium-term
prospects for the New Zealand economy still remain strong when you look
at what was being forecast on election day.
So,
liquidations are never easy. They're
always a part of the business landscape.
We know that there has been a correction.
We know that when you come off an economy that's got quite a lot
of fizz in it,
and there's been a dozen official cash rate
hikes, and 7.3% inflation, we know that
there's going to be a hangover after that.
And so we are just working through that as best we can
by getting the economic settings as sharp as we
can to get
as many businesses as we can through this, and for them to
fly once we've seen the light after
this latest,
through the Middle Eastern conflict.
So those are environmental factors that we need to rely on for small
businesses to succeed.
Mm.
What in this budget will reduce business failures in the next 12
months?
Oh, well, I think you'll just see that in this budget, that it's
unashamedly focused on the things that
really count. And I think you'll see, don't underestimate
the power of law and order, and strong law and order that it's had
on businesses. I was just talking to a business
just the other night who sent me a message on, don't underestimate
law and order on small businesses and how you've seen ram raids reduce,
how you've seen retail crime reduce.
And so when you see a budget that's putting
emphasis on law and order and more investment in law and order,
when you see a budget that's doubling the spaces of trades
academies in our high schools from 10,000 to
20,000 over the next three or four years, that is something that businesses
have been crying out for. And you, Dan, would've been on the factory floor like
I've been, and they've been saying, "We've got to get our vocational training
right." There's too many kids that aren't work ready.
And so I've got a high school in my area, Massey High School, that
is a leader in trades academies. They've got kids building Kainga Ora
houses on the school campus.
And
they can't get enough of it. Trades, building and construction, automotive,
hospitality, tourism,
all those applied
pieces of
the curriculum that they are putting towards apprenticeships and then
going into small business and going into manufacturing sites,
and progressing their own careers.
And so, you saw in that budget a big focus from
third year freeze fees, fee freeze, fees freeze.
You say it, Dan, you'll be better than me.
Freeze.
Third year free fees to-
Being moved over, because that was 2 billion in eight years, being moved over
to vocational training. And you can see with Penny Simmonds,
ex-Southland Institute of Technology, a real focus on that.
And frankly, business has been calling for that for 20 years.
And so we're rolling out that practical stuff.
You've seen our industry skills boards get another 15 million
to come up with eight
foundation subjects, at least eight foundation subjects that
my group, the Manufacturing Productivity
Advisory Group, MPAG.
I joined a
Teams call just the other day where they were firing back to the
industry skills board leadership as to what they wanted to see in the
manufacturing and engineering course in secondary schools for year
12 and 13. And so you're seeing a government in that
budget put a big focus, particularly on vocational
training.
Mm-hmm. All right. Dan, you finished? Any more supplementaries on that?
Yeah. You have a supplementary? Oh, I'm good. You don't. Yeah. Okay.
Francisco, supplementary.
Yeah, I've got a quick supplementary and then a primary question.
So you do your supplementary because there is another supplementary here. Yeah.
Sorry. Interested in the figures here saying around 2 billion being
reinvested into vocational education.
No, I didn't quite say that.
Okay. So what are you claiming?
I'm claiming that the
2 billion that was spent in the last eight years
on fees
free for third years,
and it was first years initially, is being
redeployed with significant amounts of that going into
vocational training. I'm not implying that 2 billion went over for
those places.
Right. Yeah.
But we're doubling the number of places.
Yeah.
And putting a real emphasis on that because the
fees free was not seeing any more kids,
all the surveys were showing no more university-
Yeah
... kids going into university. It wasn't speeding up the completion rates.
It wasn't improving the graduation rates.
And so we've redeployed that money over
to vocational training, which the small business, medium-sized
business, and manufacturers are calling out for.
Thank you, Minister. Can we come back to small business and manufacturing?
And we have a new primary from Dr. Vanessa Badenoch.
Thank you, Minister. And we've heard quite a bit about small
business in this session, and I'm just wondering if you can tell us a
bit more about
what we're doing to support manufacturing in New Zealand.
What we're doing to support manufacturing?
Yeah.
Well,
Investment Boost,
that was a big part of it.
As I said, the vocational training is a big part of it.
Creating new markets,
the
FTA in India that we will see
rolled out in the next few years. That is
fundamental for manufacturing. When you see
just how many categories are part of that, just how many tariffs are coming
off New Zealand wine, say from our, and our manufacturers as
well.
When you
see 150% tariff going down to
25% and that. And so,
our outward looking, looking for new markets,
and our support also of the farming community.
Let's not underestimate that they are also small businesses.
And we saw some confidence, for those of us that
went to field days just last week. Record numbers
through on opening day, 20% up on
attendance to 132,000
this year compared to last.
And so it's a case of
thank God for the farmers because, particularly the dairy farmers who have had a
triple Fonterra payout in the last couple of months, that have
injected a real much needed boost right through the
country, from north to south.
And subsequently, it's
helping our towns and it's helping our regions for now.
Mm-hmm. All right. A new primary from
Francisco Hernandez.
Thank you, Chair.
On the 31st of March, the Sustainable Business Council, along with
the Climate Leaders Coalition, released a report called "Driving
Sustainable Growth Opportunities for New Zealand's Economy."
In that, they quantified that the impact of
embracing a sustainable growth pathway could lead to an increase
of 22 billion a year in GDP out to 2035.
What specific opportunities have you, as small business
minister, enabled in that report to enable
that transition?
Oh, look, I think you will see,
and just finishing up with our small businesses,
those 10,000 dairy farmers, for example, and that.
They are the most carbon efficient farmers in the world.
And when you travel,
as no doubt you do, sir, you travel around these
manufacturing businesses, you travel around these small businesses.
The ones that I'm visiting aren't
needing to face huge mandates on their
sustainability practices because they are delivering them.
They know,
as we know,
as New Zealanders, the importance of showing
sustainability, of demonstrating sustainability, of demonstrating
carbon efficiency,
of meeting the demands of consumers.
And so
that's one of the great things that I've discovered being out on the
road, is that
not only are they interested in growing their businesses,
growing their margins, investing in their people.
But all to a company are very conscious
on the sustainability practices of their individual businesses, and that is
reflected across New Zealand.
Can I have a couple of sips?
But have you taken any specific measures that the report identifies?
Look, I'm happy for you to put that in written questions, and we
can go through
what that report has recommended and respond accordingly to any
specific recs where we might have picked them up or where we might have
or not picked them up. I'm certainly prepared to do that.
When the report came out, did you receive a briefing on it?
Well,
I receive a number of briefings. I'd have to have a look back in my diary
and talk with officials. But we get written briefings, we get verbal
briefings, we do visitations, we have officials come in, we go
out to officials' offices.
Mm-hmm.
So I couldn't give you a specific on that.
But what I do know is that it's a big part of this government's
drive.
Fundamentally, we are here to grow the wealth of this country because we
know-
Yeah, primary
... that those wealthiest countries
are the ones with the best environmental records.
And
so
you go to countries
that are sadly the poorest in the world, their environmental
records, their air quality, their rivers are not so good.
We want to lift the standards, and delivery of our businesses to
improve our environmental record, and that's what we intend to
do.
All right, a new primary from Dan.
Yeah. Thanks, minister. So getting out around talking to small businesses,
the overwhelming
comment or bit of feedback that I get is around more
large businesses being owned by interests outside of their communities.
So profits flow away rather than being recycled
locally. They also have compliance costs,
and compliance burdens that are quite hard as a small business when you
compare a better-resourced large business.
And I suppose my question is:
how do we fix that, meet those compliance requirements
while not adding too much red tape?
Because a small business
is fundamentally different in terms of who does what.
Usually, it might be a mom and dad business owner, and the
mom might do the books, she might do the deliveries.
The dad might do a whole range of other things as well.
So how can we
level the playing field for small businesses, particularly those mom
and dad business owners?
Well, I think you can see that in the last
two to three years, that we have been on a journey to try and
cut as much red tape as is practical.
And you've seen us aligning,
our cabinet kind of has a policy of aligning with Australia
as far as when it goes to things like food safety and
product safety standards and as much as we can, so we don't become
a bespoke country here that
others in the world find it more difficult to do business with.
But overall,
you can see us really looking hard into all those
compliance issues for small business, whether they're around employment law,
whether they're around health and safety.
Those are things that you can see us trying to
purpose-fit them because there's too many small
businesses that were drowning in too much compliance.
And so yes, there's always going to be an element of
responsibility and safety that we must adhere to.
But we want to be able to ensure that our businesses have got every
opportunity to grow and expand. And so we are
in administration, where you've seen the last two or three years in a legislative
sleet trying to ensure that our legislation and
their statutory responsibilities are fit for purpose.
And you could see that with a change to the fringe benefit
taxes, for example. I'll give you one, where they no longer have to
keep a-- those that are using-
Books, yeah
... a private vehicle no longer have to keep a-
Logbook
... a logbook on their mileage split and that.
And so there's just practical things like that that we'll continue to do, and hence
why we've got these advisory groups that we continue to engage with as to how
can we sharpen this.
Can I just add, so as well as the broader cross-government thing the minister's
pointed to-
Mm-hmm
... within our direct operations in Ross's area, it's those things like the New
Zealand Business Number, the Business Connect, and the
eInvoicing, those are all aimed at trying to reduce those
costs to business, particularly small businesses.
Yeah. And just on the eInvoicing, this government was the one that
mandated, and talking about cash flow, and cash flow for local
businesses and not big corporates overseas.
It was this government that implemented that
all government, ministries, departments, and agencies
must pay their
suppliers within 10 working days.
eInvoices they must pay in five working days.
And that government must be,
government is now eInvoice capable.
And in fact, the suppliers into government, and
many of them are the small businesses that you talk about, medium-sized New Zealand
businesses,
they must also be eInvoicable
capable. And those that they
supply and service must also have the
ability to eInvoice. And so it's efficiencies like that.
But we're really proud as an administration that where
some in government were so slow on paying invoices, whereas now it's
mandated 10 working days or less,
or five working days if it's an eInvoice.
And that's meaning greater cash flow right across the country.
Because as you know, there's government departments, agencies, ministries all
around the place.
That segues quite well to our next supplementary on this.
So prompt payment rules. So in the last government, we had
legislation that allowed those other entities
outside of government, the big players, to actually-
Pay our small retailers, our small
businesses within a certain time frame, but that was reversed by this
government. Have you given any thought to that or learnt anything along the way
that might
mean that we have to level the playing field for those
small retailers or those small businesses?
Well, what was the policy advice on that one?
I'm not sure of the policy advice, but in terms of the actuals, in terms of the
e-invoicing and the take-up of those prompt payments, because we report on that
quarterly. In the last quarter of 2025, it was
95% of invoices among those
agencies within 10 working days.
92 of the 106 agencies were doing more than 90% within 10 working
days, and we'll be reporting on the first quarter of this year
very shortly. So, that's the actual what's happening in
practice as opposed to the rules. I'm not sure on the policy. I'm sorry.
We can come back on that if that's-
Mm-hmm.
Just adding to what the minister picked up and what Nick said
is,
not on the policy per se, but on the invoicing procurement rules that have been
rolled out. And so large businesses, which is what that policy
was aimed at, who are suppliers to government and who will receive the
favorable payment terms that government offer, will be required
to give no less
terms to the businesses within their own supply chain.
So, that was the change in the procurement rules, and that's targeted at
businesses with turnover of, I think, over 33 million.
So it's
particularly targeting the very large businesses.
The government right now, I think, estimates there's something like $50
billion that get paid out over annually in terms of all those invoices
across supply chains. So that
95% within 10 working days injects a lot of money into the
economy, and that will flow further with the change in the procurement rules.
Mm-hmm. And the fastest payer, one of the fastest payers, anecdotally,
IRD. So he doth take it, but also giveth.
A supplementary, Dr. Hamish Campbell.
Excellent, and thank you. You probably have touched a lot of my questions.
The question I'd written down was: what is the government doing to support
e-invoicing, and how does this
help small businesses? I think you probably have addressed the first
part of the question. But how does this support small businesses?
Oh, well, and Ross, you're our in-house
e-invoicing expert around the efficiencies of this.
There's been a NZIA
research, hasn't there, on just how many hundreds of millions e-invoicing, once up
and running, will actually
create as far as GDP goes.
Recent
research on the economic
benefits of e-invoicing put the value at 800 million per
annum back into the economy once e-invoicing is
fully operational and rolled throughout the economy.
The target number of invoices that go
through the economy is--
We've got a way to go, but we are looking at ways in how we accelerate that
with the e-Invoicing Leaders Adoption Group, which is a
collection of CTOs and senior leaders from across
large business. Probably touches a big part of the supply chains
across New Zealand.
The other...
Yeah, I think I'll leave it there.
But it saves. Yeah, very good question, Dr. Campbell.
It saves,
on average, going from traditional invoice to
e-invoice, saves 11 minutes.
Mm-hmm.
And so you multiply that across big and small businesses.
There's some real productivity savings there.
I was just going to mention that one of the
tricks to unlock the benefits is the number of businesses are
e-invoice enabled.
Mm-hmm.
And we've been working very close with the likes of Xero to see
what they can do, and they've recently automatically registered just
over 60,000, I think the number was, in the last few days of additional
businesses through their platform.
That means they automatically can benefit from the e-invoicing.
There's no compliance burden on them because they are getting it as part of their
package.
That puts New Zealand on the people standard because this is all a
standard-based system.
Sixth in the world in terms of the number of registered businesses.
So that's been a big win for the team that's been working quite
hard to achieve that.
Yeah. And just finally, Madam Chair, we might be out of time, but it's just a great
example where government is showing the leadership there, and
I've been part of a e-invoicing adoption leadership
group, and there's
big business, there's banks, there's everyone else.
Because they can see that government's taken the lead and mandating it
for its suppliers, it's coming on board too.
So this whole e-invoicing,
relatively in quick succession, will filter through our
economy and society for the remainder of this decade.
Okay. Very quick question from
Dr. David Wilson.
Yes, very quick.
I think it's a vote of thanks, is it not?
We're getting close.
We still have a few minutes. Don't worry.
Just noting the trend in the vote, Minister, that we've gone from 38
million down to 34 million, and I see that there is an increase
directed at increasing productivity skills in the manufacturing sector.
It's almost a rounding error of 1.1 million.
So as the brand spanking new minister, can we expect more
advocacy for the work, excellent work, that's being done in these sectors,
and an increase in spending going forward?
Well, you will see this term as we reflect, Dr.
Wilson, on estimates '26, '27. You will see all the
programs that
we delivered last year rolled out this year, our partnerships
across the country, delivering
equal services, if not better. You've already seen a few announcements
where we're boosting the likes of business advisory services,
resilience training and AI support.
So I think the story going into
2026, '27 financial year is a
really positive one for this vote.
So the answer was yes.
Yes.
Okay, a final question. We have just a couple of minutes left.
Honorable Megan Woods.
Thank you . And thank you, Minister.
Quick question. Make it quick.
It is.
Yeah.
I was just going to say nice things to the minister-
Oh, thank you
... about his first foray into estimates.
One is around more the manufacturing side of your portfolio and
discussions that you may have had with your colleague, the Minister of Energy,
around cuts in the budget that were there around the accelerating
energy efficiency and fuel switching in industry, which
is manufacturing, essentially. So that went from 114
million in the '25, '26 year down to
11.9 million in this budget. That's an
89% cut.
Do you have concerns about cutting support for our
manufacturers on one of their largest costs
at this time when we know so many businesses are struggling, and that this
is the difference between keeping people in jobs?
Thank you, Dr. Woods.
I think you'll see, and you're already seeing from this government,
more emphasis and more discussion and more action around the
likes of electricity affordability and future
energy sustainability than we've probably seen that discussion and those
action points
for 40 years. You've seen a policy announced just before
the budget as far as that government guarantee-
Mm-hmm
... to allow industry to exit out of gas.
And so,
we are well-aligned and
as far as the plight of manufacturing and exiting out of gas, we
can see that that is not going to be easy
for them, and hence why we're supporting
them with a government guarantee as they go on and put
that capital down. The banks like it because it says it gives them
the confidence-
Sure. That's good question
... to back-
Yeah
... those businesses that are transitioning out of gas and looking at other
options.
So Minister, have you asked your colleague how much of the
$103 million that was cut for supporting
manufacturers has indeed been reprioritized into
supporting the manufacturing sector?
Because I can't see it-
I can
... anywhere in the estimates, but you may be able to direct me where
that is.
Oh. Well, and I know that I think you had the Minister of Energy in before
me, so I have a number of discussions with him.
We're meeting all the time. We know the cost of
electricity is prohibitive for many
cases. We know that we need to help businesses
transition out of gas, which we are doing.
We know that we need to-
Sorry, Minister. I'm just asking where it's been reprioritized.
Okay. All right. Members, I think this is-- All right. Okay.
Look, I'm-
What I'm going to say here is-
My conversations with the Minister of Energy are ongoing
Minister, we have concluded, yeah, the time we had-
Thank you
... for you, Minister.
Well done.
Thank you for your insights.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you, members.
Thank you.